# Serialization

Serialization is the automatic process of transforming data structures or objects into a format that Fusee can store and reconstruct. For this Fusee uses `Google's Protocol Buffers` ([protobuf](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf)). This is a data format for serialization which utilizes an interface description language that describes the structure of data.
This description is generated automatically, through class annotations, from protobuf-net, with the help of annotations; for more information see engine developer section.

## protobuf-net

Fusee uses protobuf-net in a modified version where all dependencies to `System.ServiceModel` and `System.ServiceModel.Primitives` are removed.  The fork can be found here: [https://github.com/FUSEEProjectTeam/protobuf-net-fusee](https://github.com/FUSEEProjectTeam/protobuf-net-fusee). This is necessary as we use [mono linker](https://github.com/mono/linker) for our Webassembly builds which throws an exception when these references are being traversed.

All serializable classes can be found within `Fusee.Serialization` and `Fusee.Math`.

## Conversion from `FusFile` to `Fusee.Core.Scene` and vice versa

All data within the V1 serialization needs to be converted from the "low-level" `FusFile` to the "high-level" `Fusee.Core.Scene` before being usable within Fusee.

To convert a serialized `FusFile` to a `Fusee.Core.Scene.SceneContainer` one can use the static method:

```csharp
FusSceneConverter.ConvertFrom(FusFile fus)
```

For converting a "high-level" `SceneContainer` to a serializable `FusFile` the method:

```csharp
FusFile FusSceneConverter.ConvertTo(SceneContainer sc)
```

exists.

## Read files generated by the Fusee Blender exporter

Files generated with the help of Fusee's Blender exporter are composed of "low-level" classes which needs to be converted first. This is implemented within the `AssetStorage.Get(Async)<T>` logic. For example:

```csharp
// open file
var fs = File.OpenRead("myFusFile.fus");
var lowLevelScene = ProtoBuf.Serializer.Deserialize<FusFile>(fs);
var scene = FusSceneConverter.ConvertFrom(lowLevelScene);
```

## 👷 Engine Developer

### Adding a new serializable class to `Fusee.Serialization`

- Add class to `Fusee.Serialization`
- Let the class inherit from `FusComponent`
- Annotate the class with the `[ProtoContract]` keyword
- Annotate each class member which should be serializable with `[ProtoMember(NUMBER)]`, make sure `NUMBER` is a unique number, start with 1, e. g.: `[ProtoMember(1)]`.
- Go to `FusComponent` and let this class know of the new inheritance by adding `[ProtoInclude(1xx, typeof(Name_of_your_class))]`. Increase the counting accordingly.
- Add and implement both new visitors inside `FusSceneConverter`
- Add "high-level" class to `Fusee.Core.Scene`
- Write tests for your conversion inside `Fusee.Test.Serialization.V?`

#### Example

```csharp

    /// Fusee.Serialization.V?.MyNewClass.cs
    [ProtoContract]
    public class MyNewClass : FusComponent
    {
        [ProtoMember(1)]
        public int Counter;
    }

    /// Inside FusComponent.cs
    [ProtoContract]
    [ProtoInclude(100, typeof(FusTransform))]
    /// [...]
    [ProtoInclude(197, typeof(MyNewClass))]

    public class FusComponent : IComponent
    {
       /// [...]
    }

    /// Inside FusSceneConverter.cs
    [VisitMethod]
    public void ConvMyNewClass(MyNewClass mnc)
    {
        /// conversion logic
    }

```

For inheritance and other advanced concepts study the existing classes and/or visit the [protobuf-net wiki](https://code.google.com/archive/p/protobuf-net/wikis).

### Conceptual changes from v0.8.0 onward

This paragraph describes the transition from the "old" (no version) FUSEE serialization scheme to the new one (V1).

The "old" serialization utilizes "container" classes and derivatives decorated for serialization with Protobuf .NET's `[ProtoContract]` etc. attributes while at the same time using these classes directly at run-time as scene graph building blocks.

Since Protobuf .NET version 3.* protobuf does not support references within serializable properties. Allowing components within multiple nodes requires this feature. Besides at several places, it was necessary to implement between scene graph building blocks used in serialization different from those used during traversal.

From V1 on, FUSEE's serialization is completely separated from scene graph building blocks in `Fusee.Engine`. As a result, `Fusee.Xene` was completely freed from all references and thus neither references `Fusee.Serialization` nor `Fusee.Engine`.

#### New/modified Files

Files added to `Engine.Core.Scene`

- SceneNode.cs
- SceneComponent.cs

"Old" Serialization | V1 Serialization | `Engine.Core.Scene`
----|----|-------
 `SceneContainer` | `FusScene` | `SceneContainer`
 `SceneNodeContainer` | `FusNode` | `SceneNode`
 `SceneComponentContainer` | `FusComponent` | `SceneComponent`
 `TransformComponent` | `FusTransform` | `Transform`
`Mesh` | `FusMesh`| `Mesh`
`LightComponent` | `FusLight` | `Light`
`AnimationComponent` | `FusAnimation` | `Animation`
`BoneComponent` | `FusBone` | `Bone`
`CanvasTransformComponent` | `FusCanvasTransform` | `CanvasTransform`
`RectTransformComponent` | `FusRectTransform` | `RectTransform`
`XFormComponent` | `FusXForm` | `XForm`
`XFormTextComponent` | `FusXFormText` | `XFormText`
`PtOctantComponent`  (File: OctantComponent.cs)| `FusOctant` (dummy implementation) | `Octant`
`AnimationComponent` | `FusAnimation` | `Animation`
`AnimationTrackComponent` | `FusAnimationTrack` | `AnimationTrack`
`MaterialComponent` | `FusMaterialComponent` | `Material`
`MaterialPBRComponent` | `FusMaterialPBRComponent` | `MaterialPBR`