  > ⚠️ **Pre-Release Content**  

# WebAssembly

## Introduction

WebAssembly (abbreviated Wasm) is a binary instruction format for a stack-based virtual machine. Wasm is designed as a portable target for compilation of high-level languages like C/C++/Rust, enabling deployment on the web for client and server applications. (see: [webassembly.org](https://webassembly.org/)).

The Mono project managed to compile the dotnet runtime to Wasm (see: [github.com/mono/sdks/wasm](https://github.com/mono/mono/tree/master/sdks/wasm)). Therefore it's possible to run native C# DLLs within the browser.

Furthermore, Wave Engine ([waveengine.net](https://waveengine.net/)) developers are providing their implementation of .NET bindings for WebGL through WebAssembly [WebGL.NET](https://github.com/WaveEngine/WebGL.NET) to the public.

These tools enable Fusee to compile web applications without relying on [JSIL](http://www.jsil.org/) cross compilation anymore (from v0.8 onward).

## Usage

A minimal Fusee Wasm project needs, besides the actual Fusee core application, at least, the following two user generated files:

### 1) index.html

The following `*.js` files needs to be included within `<head>`:

```javascript
<script src="runtime.js"></script>
<script defer src="Scripts/mono_support.js"></script>
<script defer src="Scripts/SkiaSharp.js"></script>
<script defer src="canvaskit.js"></script>
<script defer src="dotnet.js"></script>
```

The following javascript snippet starts the C# program inside `<body>`:

```javascript
        var App = {
            init: function () {

                BINDING.call_static_method("[Fusee.NAMESPACE] Fusee.NAMESPACE.CLASS_NAME:METHOD_NAME", []);
            },
        };
```

### 2) A C# class with this or a similar content (replace _NAMESPACE_ and _CLASS_NAME_ accordingly)

```csharp

namespace Fusee.NAMESPACE
{
    internal static class CLASS_NAME
    {
        public static void METHOD_NAME()
        {
            // This method takes care of everything
            WebAsmProgram.Start(new MyWasmImpl());
        }
    }

    public class MyWasmImpl : WebAsmBase
    {
        private RenderCanvasImp _canvasImp;
        private Core.MyFuseeApp _app;

        public override void Run()
        {
            base.Run();
            // Inject Fusee.Engine.Base InjectMe dependencies
            IO.IOImp = new Fusee.Base.Imp.WebAsm.IOImp();

            // AssetProvider
            // ...
            //

            // create an instance of the actual Fusee core application
            // which can be found in another project
            _app = new Core.MyFuseeApp();

            // Inject Fusee.Engine InjectMe dependencies (hard coded)
            _canvasImp = new RenderCanvasImp(canvas, gl, canvasWidth, canvasHeight);
            _app.CanvasImplementor = _canvasImp;
            _app.ContextImplementor = new RenderContextImp(_app.CanvasImplementor);
            Input.AddDriverImp(new RenderCanvasInputDriverImp(_app.CanvasImplementor));

            // Start the app
            _app.Run();
        }

        public override void Update(double elapsedMilliseconds)
        {
            if (_canvasImp != null)
                _canvasImp.DeltaTime = (float)(elapsedMilliseconds / 1000.0);
        }

        public override void Draw()
        {
            _canvasImp?.DoRender();
        }

        public override void Resize(int width, int height)
        {
            base.Resize(width, height);
            _canvasImp.DoResize(width, height);
        }
    }
}
```

Furthermore one needs the following files which can be copied from any example project:

- canvaskit.js
- canvaskit.wasm
- Scripts/mono_support.js
- Scripts/SkiaSharp.js

Anything else will be added/copied during compilation.

Please make sure to include the `FuseeWasmCopyInheritedAssets` target within your `*.csproj` file, as well as the `WebAssembly.*` references and the `MonoWasmLinkSkip` property. The easiest way is to just copy an example project `*.csproj` and modify it to your needs.

## 👷 Engine Developer

## Short implementation overview of WebAssembly in Fusee

As written above, Fusee utilizes mono's dotnet for Wasm implementation on the one hand, on the other hand, WebGL.NET bindings generated by the WaveEngine team.

The architecture of Fusee allows separate implementations for arbitrary renderer and build targets. To implement the new WebGL Wasm backend, one needs to implement the `RenderContextImp` which implements the `IRenderContextImp` interface, which anon represents the methods within the non platform specific `RenderContext`. This implementation (and the WebGL.NET bindings) can be found within `Base.Engine.Imp.Graphics.WebAsm`. This implementation relies upon the Mono WebAssembly bindings which are currently under development and therefore not available via NuGet. The file `$(FuseeRoot)\NuGet.config` therefore adds a new package source `wasm` and the corresponding source folder `$(FuseeRoot)\packages\*.*` in which the Mono bindings can be found.

This suffices for VS 2019 and the corresponding *.csproj files to find and obtain the correct packages (as of today: `WebAssembly.Bindings`, `WebAssembly.Net.Http` and `WebAssembly.Net.WebSockets`).

Futhermore it contains the new build task `Mono.WebAssembly.Sdk` as a usable NuGet package.

### Build via `Mono.WebAssembly.Sdk`

The build task gathers all used C# DLLs in a first step and tries to slim and optimize the code with the help of [mono linker](https://github.com/mono/linker). This little tool steps through the generated IL code and tries to optimize.

Unfortunately the linker crashes while traversing `System.ServiceModel` and `System.ServiceModel.Primitives`. Therefore these dependencies are removed from our protobuf-net-fusee version.

Beyond that, it also needs a package reference to `System.Collections.Immutable` within the `*.csproj` file, as this dependency isn't gathered automatically during traversal.

In addition, we need to make sure, that the linking process skips the namespaces `Fusee.Engine.Core`, `Fusee.Serialization`, `Fusee.Math.Core` and `protobuf-net.Core`. This is done inside the `*.csproj` file via `<MonoWasmLinkMode>Full</MonoWasmLinkMode>` in combination with `<MonoWasmLinkSkip>Fusee.Engine.Core;Fusee.Serialization;...</MonoWasmLinkSkip>`. Otherwise the optimization process removes (empty) classes or (base) methods / attributes which are needed for de-serialization.

The C# DLLs are being copied to `output_folder/managed` after that, and all other necessary files (dotnet.wasm, etc.) are added, too.

The resulting build folder is self-contained.
